Decades Of Military Service Included 2 Tours In Iraq

Greenevillian Says Church Gave Him 'Stabilization'

James Nance learned through experience that dedication and a positive attitude are important factors for success in the military.
Iraq campaign veteran Nance, 59, received a Quilt of Honor, Respect and Valor Saturday from the Greene County Quilters group at the Durham-Hensley Health and Rehab Center in Chuckey.
Nance served for 30 years in the Army's Tennessee National Guard, including two tours in Iraq in 2003 and 2007-08.
The quilters and family members present Saturday expressed their thanks to Nance.
"I appreciate it. It is my honor to accept it," he said.
Nance, an Illinois native, moved to Greeneville 40 years ago. He has since lived in Greene County and more recently, near Bulls Gap in Hawkins County.
He began his National Guard service with the 733rd Engineer Company in Greeneville, and later became a member of the 730th Quartermaster Company based in Johnson City.
Nance was a sergeant when he was first called up in 2003, and was promoted to the rank of staff sergeant after the completion of a one-year tour in Iraq that ended in 2008. He received a medical-related discharge from the service in 2014.
ENDURING FREEDOM
Nance's National Guard unit was called up in late 2002 and he soon found himself in Kuwait, awaiting deployment to Iraq as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Nance spent six months in Iraq in 2003. The job of the 730th was to deliver supplies like water and food to U.S. and other coalition troops serving in the Anbar Province area in Iraq, near the Syrian border.
Nance's duties included training Iraqi troops in vehicle maintenance as part of a MITT, or military transition, team helping allied Iraqi forces.
The 730th was not involved in direct conflict with enemy forces, but Nance recalled one instance where some Iraqi troops were handcuffed and blindfolded after a plot to harm U.S. troops was uncovered.
He said that incident was the exception to the rule. Nance added that some of the Iraqi soldiers he trained were eager to learn, while others were indifferent -- much the same as it is at home.
"They were just like everybody else. You got some smart ones who applied themselves and some not-so-smart ones," Nance said.
"Around my interpreters, I trusted (those) boys completely," he said. "A lot of people didn't give them a chance."
Nance will never forget the oppressive heat, where temperatures in the Kuwait desert could reach 140 degrees or higher.
"It's the only place I've ever been in my life where I wished the wind would stop blowing. It was like a blast furnace in your face," he said.
The troops lived in tents in 2003. During his second tour, his unit stayed in two-bunk rooms with air conditioners.
Nance said he was fortunate to have never come in contact with any of the improvised explosive devices, known as IEDs, that killed and injured many U.S. troops in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Nance is particularly proud of helping set up a church while on one tour in Iraq. He said many of the cooks and caterers for U.S. Army troops were from countries like Sri Lanka, India, Kenya and Uganda.
"One of the Kenyans who was a servant started talking to a chief warrant officer and he talked to me about trying to start a church with (them)," Nance said.
An old building to conduct services in was found, and the church was later moved to a pre-fabricated building.
Some of those who attended were "saved" as a result, Nance said.
SELF-RELIANCE
Nance returned from his second tour in Iraq in August 2008. During his years in the Tennessee National Guard, he also spent time in Germany and Panama.
He said not all Guardsmen adjusted well to service overseas, and some had problems after returning home.
"It can be hard on the family," Nance said. "Any time you're out of your environment, it's going to be an experience. A lot of what you make of it depends on yourself."
Nance was an electrician for many years and became a truck driver upon returning home from Iraq. He finished his working career by spending six years employed at the Tennessee National Guard's maintenance shop in Johnson City.
There were sacrifices in Nance's personal life, but he considers his military service "well worth it."
"The experience to go to different places and see different things, you find that people are people," Nance said. "I found out that laughter is a universal language. One of the things I would do is break the ice and try to get them laughing."
Nance said every young American should serve in some capacity for their country, although the pressure of military service is not for everyone.
"You must be disciplined," he said. "You've got to have that stabilization and church was the place (for me) to get it."
Nance was appreciative of the quilt he received from the Mosheim-based Greene County Quilters group.
"I think it's great for the veterans. It shows that people still do care," he said. "Freedom is not free."