British suicide bomber killed in Iraq named as Mohammed Rizwan Awan

Man pictured in Isis propaganda on social media is identified by his family in Huddersfield

A British suicide bomber responsible for an attack in Iraq is the nephew of a prominent former councillor and had travelled to the war-torn country with his wife, it can now be revealed.

Mohammed Rizwan Awan is believed to have killed more than 30 people when he detonated a bomb in Anbar province, west of the Iraqi capital, Baghdad, on Monday.

The Islamic State fighter who was known by the name Abu Musa al-Britani, was shown smiling while holding an AK47 in Isis propaganda material.

Awan, 26 had left Britain with his wife, Sophie, around July last year. The newlywed couple from Huddersfield, West Yorkshire had told their respective families that they were planning to carry out umrah – a pilgrimage to Mecca, Saudi Arabia.


The stories you need to read, in one handy email
 Read more
However, the couple, who did not have any children and had only been married for two years, did not make contact again. Letters found at their home said they did not plan to return to the UK and intended to settle in Saudi Arabia.

Awan, who worked for British Gas, was the nephew of Shahida Awan – the first female Asian councillor in the borough when she was elected in 2004. Her husband, Shabir, said the family were “not angry” with Awan but just “shocked” by the events and were grieving.

He said: “He was a smart, well-dressed young man. We usually only saw him at special occasions like weddings and Eid and he was always very pleasant.

“He had married around two years ago. She was a girl he had chosen himself and the family did not know much about her but they seemed happy together. Then last year he told us that he was going on umrah with his wife and we thought nothing of it and then they didn’t return.

Advertisement

“That’s when we found the letters and they said that they were planning to live in Saudi Arabia. I know his parents were worried but what can you do?”

He added: “We are all very shocked and sad about this and we need time to grieve.”

The couple are both believed to have been born in the UK.

Awan’s mother, Noorjahan Baig, 50, sobbed uncontrollably when contacted by the Guardian, repeatedly saying that she just wanted her son back. Meanwhile his father, Mohammed Idress, 60, a bus driver was described as a “nice man” and a good Muslim.

Local councillor Mohammad Sarwar said: “We are all very surprised. He comes from a good family and it was completely unexpected. His father has worked on the buses all his life and gets on with everyone in the local community.

“The only explanation that I can think of is that sometimes these young people get into the wrong hands and then they get brainwashed. What they are doing is not good and Islam does not teach them to do this. Islam is a peaceful religion.”

In 2008 when Awan was just 18, he was attacked with a machete after being caught up in gang warfare. At the time his family said he was an innocent victim. According to a report in the Huddersfield Examiner, Awan was put on life support in hospital after his face was slashed nine times.

They said Awan, who was studying business at Bradford college at the time, was taking a friend to work when he was dragged into a disagreement between two rival gangs.

During the attack in Iraq, Awan, a former pupil of Honley High school, is believed to have killed state security personnel, as well as aligned Sunni forces. The deathtoll of 30 has been disputed, with the Iraqi state claiming the suicide bomber was the only casualty.

Advertisement

Another jihadi fighter with the same name was mortally wounded during a suicide attack in Iraq, in May last year.

Experts confirmed that the bomber then was a man of Kosovan-Albanian heritage living in the UK.

Local MP Barry Sheerman said it was “shocking news” that a suicide bomber killed in Iraq could be a Huddersfield man. He said: “If this is confirmed then it really is shocking news. How terrible for the family to find out in such horrendous circumstances.

“We do not have a reputation in Huddersfield for radical mosques or preachers and our prime concern is to now find out his history and how he came to be radicalised. After the dreadful atrocities in Brussels, I will be doing all I can to ensure that he harmony and community peace we enjoy in Huddersfield is preserved.”

Awan’s paternal aunt Shahida was hailed for “breaking the ice for Asian women” after becoming the first ever Asian woman to be voted on to Kirklees council in 2004.

The businesswoman and mother-of-two was also the chairman of the Huddersfield Pakistan Community Alliance and a founder of the Neighbourhood Learning Centre in Thornton Lodge, Huddersfield.

Awan, is the latest suicide bomber to have come from West Yorkshire. In 2015, Talha Asmal, 17, from Dewsbury, was one of four suicide bombers who carried out attacks near an oil refinery south of Baiji in Iraq.

All four of the men who carried out the 7 July 2005 bombings in London also had connections to the region.