Nostalgia for the Saddam era is thwarting a truly united Iraq

In the last month, media coverage of Iraq has ranged from the impending collapse of a dam that could kill millions to clerics appointing “committee members" to select a cabinet and a crumbling economy. This is on top of the long-standing woes caused by ISIL, Iranian-backed militias, unrest in Kurdistan, incursions from Turkey, ineffectual politicians and increasing sectarian polarisation.

Western politicians – including presidential candidates – now extol their opposition to the US invasion. As one commentator in Britain’s The Independent put it, many observers openly question whether the removal of Saddam Hussein “was all it was cracked up to be". Many believe it was not.

In an interview last January with Asharq Al Awsat, Ayad Allawi said Iraqis were nostalgic for Saddam because of the mediocre performance of the recent governments, which have burnt Iraqis with the flames of sectarianism. Comments by Shia or Kurdish observers are often meant to address the level of disappointment and frustration with the new Iraq. A Shia Iraqi by the name of Jawad Khalaf Al Asadi, once jailed by the Baath regime, was quoted in Al Quds Al Arabi saying: “I wish Saddam were to be resurrected … to take this wrecked ship into safe shores."

Kurdish journalist Shirzad Shikani wrote that Kurds missed Saddam due to the failing leaderships of the Kurdish Parties. Al Monitor quoted from the piece before it was removed.

If social media platforms, where much of Iraq’s public political discussion takes place, reflect any public sentiments, the claims of Mr Allawi bear some truth. One event, however, showcased how far online opinion, particular among Sunni Iraqis, has to go to understand the implications of their “nostalgia": the death last November of Ahmed Chalabi, the controversial Shia politician who served as deputy prime minister of Iraq after the fall of Saddam. 

The vile commentary and gloating was hard to stomach. Instead of anger being directed at the late politician’s failure to construct a promising future for Iraq, it was on the “traitor" who helped the US to occupy the country and overthrow the regime. The reaction was perceived by many as nostalgia for the previous Sunni hegemony which according to Iraq’s Shia and Kurds is a sign that Sunnis are discontented with their lack of a leadership role in Iraq.

This perception is not necessarily true. Yearning for Saddam’s Iraq, in many cases, has little to do with Saddam or his style of ruling.

As Nada, a Twitter personality with a significant following among frustrated Sunnis, put it: “Many love Iraq and are heart-broken to witness its deterioration, which they feel happened after the invasion and the emergence of failing leaders."

Dina Al Azawi, a writer now living in the United States but who has a large Facebook following in Iraq, lost her brother and cousin in the violence that engulfed the country in 2004.

“Under Saddam, our foreign policy was balanced, and the world respected us," she wrote. “Iraq was not a proxy for a foreign agenda. Yes, we were independent and sovereign. It was a tyranny, but it was a state. Iraq does not even resemble a state today. It is not about who rules, it is about how we were ruled."

She is one of many Iraqi Sunnis who compare life before and after the 2003 fall of Saddam, often concluding that tyrannical rule is better than the chaos of today’s Iraq.

More than two million Sunnis in Iraq are displaced. The government has accomplished little in the way of reconciliation and thousands of Sunnis remain in prisons without trial. Meanwhile, no charges have been laid over the horrific massacre of Hawija in 2013 when government security forces fired at peaceful unarmed protesters, killing 54 and injuring hundreds. More recently, news of Shia militias’ continuing torture of Sunnis has been confirmed. Nostalgia for better days is predictable.