US Special Operations Forces capture significant Islamic State operative in Iraq

The unnamed militant was questioned at a detention facility in Erbil, northern Iraq after his capture

An American Special Operations force has captured an Isil commander in northern Iraq in what the Pentagon hopes will be a crucial development in the fight against the extremist group.
Defence officials told the New York Times that the unnamed Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (Isil) operative was being questioned at a detention facility in Erbil, the capital of Iraq’s Kurdistan region.
They said the interrogation could take weeks or months, and that the man would then be turned over to Kurdish officials.
A 200-strong unit, known as the expeditionary targeting force (ETF) has been arriving in the area in recent weeks, ready to expand operations as part of the first major American combat presence in the country since the United States pulled out in 2011.

Volunteers from different nationalities, who have joined the Kurdish peshmerga forces to fight against Islamic State militants, gather with Kurdish peshmerga forces on the outskirts of Kirkuk last month
Captain Jeff Davis, a Pentagon spokesman, told AFP news agency that the American force was charged with capturing Isil leaders. "The ETF has begun operations in Iraq. But we will not discuss the details of those missions when it risks compromising operational security," he said.
The team is working with Iraqi and Kurdish forces to establish informant networks and to conduct further raids on Isil safe-houses and compounds.
The Pentagon has credited previous raids with uncovering a trove of valuable intelligence on Isil’s financial operations and security measures.
Information harvested from laptops, mobile phones and other materials recovered during a May 16 raid reportedly helped the United States identify, locate and carry out an air strike against an influential Isil lieutenant, named as Abu Hamid, on May 31.

Iraqi forces are battling Islamic State in the country's north and west
The trove - comprising as much as seven terabytes of data - included information on how the extremist group’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, tries to avoid being tracked by coalition forces.
The possibility of future raids now raises questions about what will happen to the detainee and others like him, given that President Barack Obama has ruled out sending any more terror suspects to Guantanamo Bay and the United States does not want to create a holding centre for Isil captives in Iraq.