Why Matt Gallagher’s New Novel About the Iraq War Matters Now

It was 13 years ago tomorrow that a U.S.-led coalition launched a series of airstrikes in Iraq, dubbed “Shock and Awe,” which triggered the beginning of the near-decade-long war. The legacy of the Iraq War and its resurgence in the national conversation, especially now in the midst of a particularly charged and vitriolic election year, are among the urgent and resonant questions of Youngblood (Atria), a smart and riveting new novel by Matt Gallagher, set in the fictional town of Ashuriyah. Raised in Reno, Nevada, and now living in Brooklyn, Gallagher is an Iraq veteran—his first book, Kaboom, is a memoir that grew out of the blog he kept during his deployment (and which was subsequently shut down by the U.S. military).

Seen through the eyes of new lieutenant Jack Porter, Youngblood inherits a similar immediate, deadpan first-person voice, and shares with Kaboom some of the stellar details of the Iraqi desert towns and the world of the base camp—whether it’s the visceral charge of combat or a private reading St. Augustine’s Confessions in a Porta-John. But the scope is vastly different: While Kaboom brought the reader fully and compellingly into the present-day reality of the ground occupation in Iraq, Youngblood is a novel obsessed with the past, looking through a far wider lens. It’s set near the end of the occupation, as the U.S. is preparing to withdraw from Iraq. Porter is driven by his mission to protect the local Iraqis, while Sergeant Chambers, a hardened veteran of four tours, is assigned to his unit to guide the withdrawal process. Chambers’s aggressive leadership and gray-area morals trigger both rebellion and suspicion in Porter; Youngblood centers largely on the consequences of Porter’s investigation into a detective story from the last chapter of the war, of a lost soldier and a local sheik’s daughter, Rana.

Full disclosure: I was first introduced to Gallagher, along with some of his fellow vet writers Phil Klay and Elliot Ackerman, by Ben Fountain, civilian author of the brilliant war novel The Long Halftime Walk of Billy Lynn, after a reading in Brooklyn. Later, when the Words After War workshop Gallagher was teaching opened its doors to civilians, I joined the group for a semester. I’d never been a believer in the necessity of writing from experience, but I was curious about what that kind of experience brought to a workshop, about the differences between actual experience and writerly authority, about the importance of fiction as a means of understanding war. Those questions still intrigue, and it was part of why I sat down a few days ago to talk to Gallagher about the writing of Youngblood and what the Iraq War means now. Here, an excerpt from our conversation.

I want to ask you something that you asked Phil Klay a couple years ago about his Afghanistan short stories in Redeployment. You’re aware it’s a rare reader who comes to this book with an open mind. And I’ll add to that: Particularly so in an election year. How did that affect you?
I don’t think it changed any of the writing, but it impacted people’s interpretations of it. And given some of the recent comments by Donald Trump and Ted Cruz, there’s an interest from people that might not have otherwise picked up the book: When you talk about invading Syria, well, here’s what that might look like, potentially. One thing I wanted to do with Jack as a narrator was make him a cipher for different readers. It’s not necessary that they like him, but that they can come into the end of this occupation with him as he does, with fresh eyes.

There’s a very memorable character in the book who is an actual linguistic interpreter, but Jack functions as a kind of interpreter, too, existing between so many worlds: the different eras of the occupation, his war-hero brother back home, the Iraqi towns now, and this mysterious local story involving Rana he uncovers.
Absolutely. He’s really captivated by that, by his brother’s stories, by this lineage, by this legacy, by the fact that those stories took place on these same dusty streets. The whole Rana part of the story—I was less interested in whether that actually occurred than in the possibility of whether that occurred, and how that affected the community and the concept of armed conflict as a whole. In 2010, 2011, they’re only now beginning to see the consequences of some of the decisions that were made in 2005, 2006. It’s a war novel, so it’s going to have some combat sequences, but I was more interested in the aftereffects—what that meant, what that did to individual souls, to Iraqi citizens—and of the stories that a community tells itself to go on, to endure, to keep going.

You wrote a very compelling and well-received memoir; you also write essays. Why did you choose to make this a novel rather than another book of nonfiction?
I’d always been drawn to fiction as a reader; there’s that extra layer of emotional resonance. The books that I turn to, to learn more about the world, tend to be fiction. When I decided to pursue an M.F.A., I was very cognizant of the war label; I wrote anything I could to get away from that. But it was 2011, and for obvious reasons I was obsessed with the news and would stay up watching it. It seems quaint now, but when we came home, we thought we’d won the war or at least turned a corner—whatever winning means in these kinds of wars. And what does that mean, what is the legacy and inheritance of that? How does the society we live in interpret it? I thought I’ll allow myself one war story, and that’s it. I’d already done the micro-story memoir, so I figured why not tell the story of someone who’s trying to find the truth of these people later? And if I obscure it with time and memory, maybe there’s something there.

It’s so easy to think, when you’re 24 and in the center of something, that that’s all that matters. Coming home and reading more and more, especially the history of the region and oral histories of people who live there, you realize what a small part of it all you really are. So I knew what I wrote next had to be cognizant of that.

 matt gallagher
EXPAND
Matt Gallagher in Iraq
Photo: Courtesy of Simon and Schuster
What surprised you most in the process of writing it?
One character who kept growing and growing—and I was glad he did—was Chambers. I wanted to play with that Tom Berenger from Platoon stereotype that is embedded in war literature, particularly post–Vietnam War literature. How do you introduce someone like that and then show a more tender side? But as I developed him, I realized in many ways he’s a kindred spirit to [the sheik’s wife] Rana; they both survived and endured these years. I think they already decided something Jack has to figure out for himself: This is my duty; this is what I can control in the midst of this grand ruin. What matters to me is getting my soldiers home. There is this other side of Chambers, but he’s not going to show that to his men. I like that that is out there in the ether. If I return to any of these characters someday, it would be him.
That’s funny; I did picture Berenger at one point when I was reading it.
And playing with that reappropriation is something that happens in real life. Platoon and Full Metal Jacket are deeply antiwar films, but it’s funny, most soldiers and Marines can quote them verbatim and grew up watching them. They showed Platoon in officer’s school, and it was like, you don’t want to be like that lieutenant. Whether Chambers was conscious of Berenger exactly is beside the point, but he’s playing a role for sure. He feels like he can’t show weakness.

The voice—Jack’s voice, the voice of the other soldiers—is, in part, a mix of gallows humor and military-ese. Language seems to function as its own defense for them.
I think that’s the perfect word for it, defense. I was at a reading and someone asked about the inhumane reactions when the soldiers come upon the car bombing. I wouldn’t describe it as inhumane, but the most human reaction. These are very young people, this is someone they know, maybe they weren’t friends with, but they spent a lot of time with. But they have something to do; they can’t just stop there, in the 130-degree sun, with the threat of a sniper, and immerse themselves in the awfulness of it all. They have to keep going. And so this is their defense for themselves, to remind one another that we’re above this, we’re soldiers, we’re tough. But that moment, that memory, is going to linger with them long after. And when they wake up in the middle of the night, five, six years down the line, they’re not going to be thinking about that ironic joke someone made. Recognizing that gallows humor is the most human thing in the aftermath of violence was important to me.

Did you feel the need to recontextualize Iraq by entering it toward the end of the occupation?
I wanted to tell a wider story, and setting it near the end allowed me to tell the story of what had been wrought. Even smart people who watch the news, Iraq for most of them is still the invasion, maybe the “Mission Accomplished” banner, or the contractors being hung over the bridge, over the Euphrates, but the general knowledge of counterinsurgency is often foggy. And it was a huge part of the war.

It’s the trillion-dollar question: Was what happened inevitable? It’s something I think about all the time. We know withdrawing in 2011 wasn’t the right answer, but if we stayed there another century, would anything change? I don’t know. I do know that in 2007, it felt like the right thing to try to do, to try to bring a country back from the brink of civil war—a civil war that we essentially started. But to focus on the part that you can control, not just as a soldier, but as a human being, that was worth trying to pursue in writing this book. My own tour was the bridge between the two Iraqs. We inherited the one that Rios and Chambers had been a part of. Setting the novel where I do allowed me to delve in both those worlds. I read a lot of Iraqi oral history. No matter how much I had talked to them—

They’re not going to give you a truly full story.
Yeah, I mean, I have a gun in their living room. It doesn’t matter how friendly I look. Those oral histories gave me the most honest look at what nine years of war and occupation had done to Iraqi families. A lot of ruin, a lot of loss—and then, in some cases, some of the tribal sheiks profited immensely by exploiting the situation.

Tell me where you were and what was going through your mind on March 19, 2003, when the invasion broke out.
I was a sophomore in college; we had an ROTC field exercise that weekend. My roommate was going up to D.C. to the protest. You feel like you’re at the center of the storm. I think we were both deeply involved in our own ways for that reason, and we actually had a thoughtful conversation. My misgivings were more politically oriented because of the Bush administration. But I was young; I wanted to participate in history. And also I remember thinking, I don’t graduate for two and a half more years—this will be long over by the time I’m out.

And now, 13 years later?
And now, it’s strange. I was there in a very specific time and place, and the Iraq that exists in my skull is a much different place, a more stable place than we found it. So I’m proud of that. I’ve gotten to the point where I realize I was a very small part of an unjust war, but I’m still proud of my own service. I brought my soldiers home; I’m most proud of the fact that none of them ever fired a weapon in anger, despite getting shot at, despite roadside bombs. To be frustrated with the war at large but proud of my part in it may strike some people as deeply conflicting, but I think that’s the story when you’re involved with any giant institution. Really, though, it’s not about me, it’s not even about American veterans, even though a lot of this is also about what it means to send someone to bear the burden of an entire country’s decision to go to war again and again. But it’s really about the ruin the country is in that they are still trying to endure. It’s about the millions of lives that have been disrupted and lost. You hope and pray the Iraqis you worked with are still getting by.