Iraq war amputee forced to quit Bear Grylls show after Post Traumatic Stress Disorder episode: "I couldn't breathe"

Having lost her leg in the Iraq war, veteran Hannah Campbell, expected that Bear Gryll’s new show The Island to be a challenge, but she was left struggling to breathe after suffering from a post-traumatic stress episode.

Hannah, 31, has opened up about how she was forced to leave the show after suffering a number of setbacks while taking part in the show.

A huge tropical thunderstorm left her body on edge after being put in ‘panic mode’, awakening all of her memories from war.

Hannah, who felt as if she was jolted back to the horrific mortar attack in Basra in 2007, revealed how “every panic response in (her) body was triggered”.

Channel 4The Island - Women's groupThe Island - Women's group
Channel 4The Island - Women's groupAlice, Shaney, Sarah, Erica, Roz, Tilly and Cassie
“I couldn’t control myself – I started shaking, felt sick and was sweating. As the booms kept coming, I was taken back to Iraq and had to tell myself, ‘Don’t lose it’,” she said.

“I was overcome with emotion, I felt utter shame that I was a grown woman terrified of a storm. I tried to hide it but I was crying, my heart was pounding and I couldn’t breathe.”

Campbell, a divorced mother of two, went through severe trauma after losing her leg as she suffered serious shrapnel wounds to her body and face.

To arrive on the tropical island, contestants had to swim from the boat to land on the beach. Campbell had to pull her false leg in a box behind her as she swam to the shore.

Channel 4The Island - Women's groupHannah Campbell
While her steely grit saw her triumph in the first part of the show, she was eventually forced to quit because of her war injury.

“I’d pushed myself punishingly hard on the island and had a few twinges, but after the storm the pain became completely consuming,” she said.

“It was clear I could not go on.”

The pain she suffered became too “immense” and the Channel 4 show bosses decided to pull her out.

“As I was carried down the beach and on to a speedboat, I couldn’t stop crying. I really wanted to finish and I wasn’t able to because of my leg,” she said.

“I didn’t want my disability to let me down. For someone like me, who has tried so hard to overcome it, that was a harsh thing to confront.”

channel fourThe Island with Bear GryllsThe Island with Bear Grylls
Campbell was taken to a private hospital in Panama and was diagnosed with bursistis – which is a chronic inflammation on her amputated leg.

The former corporal in 19 Tank Transporter Squadron was picked out of 135,000 hopefuls wanting to live for a month in the wild on the island, where contestants have to get their own water as well as hunt for their own food.

She is even fitter than when she was on active military duty, having taken up running and skydiving. Most importantly, having been warned that her abdominal injuries made it unlikely she’d ever carry another baby, she had her ‘miracle’ second daughter, Lexi-River, in March 2014, though sadly she split with the child’s father last year.

“I have had to make peace with the fact that I’m not always fine with what happened to me in Iraq,” she said.

“Being on the island helped me see that I don’t have to keep doing all that. I am an amputee, I was in a war, I have been through a lot but I’m still standing, being a good mum, happy to be Hannah. And that’s my definition of success.”

*The Island With Bear Grylls starts tomorrow at 9pm on Channel 4.