If U.S. Withdraws From Syria And Iraq, What Will Rebels and Regimes Do?

What would total U.S. withdrawal from Syria and Iraq look like? We would, first of all, stop funding the Baghdad government, which is oppressing Sunni civilians. We would stop funding Sunni rebels, who are allied with ISIS and al-Nusra, al-Qaeda’s franchise in Syria. We would stop arming Kurdish fighters, who are allied with Kurdish rebels in Turkey on the U.S. State Department’s terrorism list.


Tanks stationed at a Turkish army position near the Oncupinar crossing gate close to the town of Kilis, south central Turkey, fire towards the Syria border, on February 16, 2016.Turkey is in favour of a ground operation into neighbouring Syria only with its allies, a senior Turkish official told reporters in Istanbul. / AFP / BULENT KILIC /Getty Images

We would stop bombing ISIS and Al Qaeda in Iraq and Syria, because as bad as they are, it is firstly a fight we cannot win given our willingness to commit troops and treasure.  Secondly, most of our allies in that fight are religious sectarians or ethnic nationalists battling each other, not long-term adherents to our democratic values. And thirdly, we have more important national security challenges, like protecting East Europe from Russia, policing Europe’s borders through NATO support, and protecting our Asian allies from China and North Korea.

Were we to withdraw support from Kurdish and Sunni fighters in Iraq and Syria, we might expect the Assad government, supported by Russia, to “regain” at least some territory in Syria. More specifically, Assad’s forces would regain control of many roadblocks, government buildings, and borders. But, they would not win the hearts and minds of the people and communities they have destroyed. Sunni rebels would be driven further underground, and a persistent and long-lasting insurgency would continue. Gaining territory in Syria is not a win for Putin and Assad, but a quagmire.

Were we to decrease involvement in Iraq, we should expect Shiite militias, Hezbollah, and the Baghdad and Tehran governments to increase the brutality of fighting against Sunni rebels. This is unfortunate, especially for civilians. But, the U.S. simply does not have the wherewithal to provide security to every part of the globe. Our half-measures actually make security worse for both them and us.

The various Sunni rebel factions, including ISIS, al-Nusra, and the so-called moderates, would draw closer and fight harder. More Sunni rebels in Iraq would go underground, fighting as insurgents that hold no territory. Al-Nusra already follows this strategy.

Recommended by Forbes
IBMVoice: Five Ways Cognitive Computing Will Power The Internet Of Things

We Forgot Our History And Fell Into Al Qaeda's Trap In Syria And Iraq
EYVoice: 3 Ways Business Owners Can Innovate For The Economic Upturn

Putin Threatens World War Again, This Time Over Syria: Will Turks And Saudis...
A Test For Iraq Amidst The Saudi-Iranian Rivalry
Where Syria & Iraq's Foreign Fighters Come From [Infographic]
MOST POPULAR Photos: Donald Trump Through The Years
TRENDING ON FACEBOOK 'Batman v Superman' Sets Record With Worst Friday-Sunday Drop For A Superhero...
MOST POPULAR Photos: Top College In Every State

Saudi Arabia, Qatar, or Turkey would increase support for those insurgents indirectly through finance and sophisticated arms such as MANPAD shoulder-launched surface-to-air missiles, or even through intervention with ground forces or a no-fly zone to protect civilians. The U.S. would likely protect these allies from escalation by Russia. But this would not immediately require troops on the ground, or planes in the air, over Syria and Iraq. Existing military bases in Europe, naval forces in the Mediterranean, and the nuclear deterrent, would be sufficient.

None of these escalatory scenarios are good for Iraq and Syria, and all include risk and a long insurgency between Sunni and Shia in Iraq, Syria, and other places that get less U.S. media attention like Yemen and Libya. No matter what, war refugees will continue to seek entrance to Europe and nearby countries like Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan.