We have not seen anything like this since the Iran-Iraq War

A year ago, we were sitting around looking at the GOP presidential field and asking a simple question: how can I select someone from this incredibly talented group?  

You had very successful governors, like Bush in Florida and Christie in New Jersey and Perry in Texas and Kasich in Ohio.  I'm talking about successful men who have actually governed big states and won re-election.  

And Walker of Wisconsin, who fought back the public-sector unions three times in four years!  The left threw everything at Walker, and he won each time.   

Add diversity with young senators like Cruz of Texas and Rubio of Florida, or a wonderful man of medicine like Carson.   

And Mrs. Fiorina, Jindal, etc.

It was an incredible list, and I probably forgot someone!  It was that strong of a field!

We are down to Cruz and Trump and maybe Kasich.  And no one is happy, especially those of us who want a candidate who can beat Mrs. Clinton.  After all, the RCP average is a mixed bag: Clinton + 11 over Trump, a dead heat with Cruz, and Kasich up 6 over Clinton!

Worse than polls is watching the Cruz and Trump sides throw nuclear bombs at each other.  It is more than pictures about wives.  It is like watching Mom and Dad call each other obscenities in front of the children!

Have you followed the social media war between the Trump and Cruz troops?  It's enough to want to make you blow up Facebook and Twitter.

My friend Melanie Sturm ("Think Again," the Aspen Times) spoke for so many of us a day ago: 2016's gonna be a nightmare, believe me.

Yes, it will be a nightmare because we are in a mutual destruction mode, like that war between Iran and Iraq back in the 1980s.  Remember that war?  It was the war that nobody won:

The protracted war between these neighboring Middle Eastern countries resulted in at least half a million casualties and several billion dollars’ worth of damages, but no real gains by other side. Started by Iraq dictator Saddam Hussein in September 1980, the war was marked by indiscriminate ballistic-missile attacks, extensive use of chemical weapons and attacks on third-country oil tankers in the Persian Gulf. Although Iraq was forced on the strategic defensive, Iran was unable to reconstitute effective armored formations or its air force and could not penetrate Iraq’s borders deeply enough to achieve decisive results. The end came in July 1988 with the acceptance UN Resolution 598.

Who knows what will happen in 2016?  I had hoped that we could elect one of those talented governors who had actually governed big states and accomplished something.    

At this point, God only knows what headline we will hear the morning after the election.  If Trump wins, my guess is that his supporters will soon learn that running a one-shareholder company is very different from governing the U.S.  If Clinton wins, we are back to where we've been for the last eight years with the added factor that the left will take over the Supreme Court.

Let's hope that it works out, but it does not look good.  In the meantime, the Trump and Cruz sides will soon start dropping chemical bombs on each other!

