Yazidi refugees return to Sinjar in Iraq – a photo essay

On 4 August 2014 the world held its breath thinking about the families trapped on top of Mount Sinjar in northern Iraq, desperately trying to escape Islamic State gunmen as they opened fire from the foot of the mountain. More than a year later, winding down the mountain road into the city of Sinjar, burnt out cars still sit on every bend


Isis graffiti in the city of Sinjar


Kurdish PKK forces on their way to a checkpoint


Haji Lefo Khider beside what remains of his home. The area was bombarded by coalition airstrikes on Isis


Wreckage of a petrol station hit by an airstrike in the south of Sinjar

 
Exile camps
A boy throws a frisbee into the air in Sharya, Iraq – an area with a large number of Yazidis living in refugee camps and makeshift concrete housing. Although media coverage of the recent escalation in migration has been intensive, it has focused on those going by boat from Turkey to seek refuge in Europe, and not the far greater number of people left behind. Some people do not want to leave; many simply do not have the means

There are four families who have moved back already, I must go too so that more people will return, and we can start to live normally again
Kejk Selo Brindar


Kejk Selo Brindar with his wife in the Khanke refugee camp in northern Iraq. He is leaving to go home to his village east of Sinjar. Luckily, his house was not damaged by airstrikes

 
Salah Hassan sits in an abandoned school in Sharya. He is preparing to move to Guhbal, north of Mount Sinjar – 10km from the Isis frontline. He wants to be closer to 16 members of his family captured by Isis

If there is an opportunity to rescue them, I will need to be nearby. You need to be ready at all times, for a rapid response
Salah Hassan

I can't trust the peshmerga to keep me safe any more
Cawry Mahlo


Cawry Mahlo sitting in her room in Sharya. Her husband left for home in the east of Sinjar a week ago, and she will leave in two days time. They leave behind a family of 24 who will only return if international security forces enter the region

 
Tents set up in abandoned buildings for refugees to keep warm during the winter in Sharya


Said Ibrahim and his family of 17 will move back to Guhbal at the end of the week

It is nearly time to start planting tomatoes, there is nothing here, we need to grow food in order to eat
Said Ibrahim


The daughter of a Yazidi peshmerga fighter sits on the stairs of an unfinished concrete building in Khanke

 
Army in residence
A PKK base in Sinjar, during a break from frontline fighting. Now that Sinjar has been retaken, parts of the city are deemed safe enough to return to

We are happy to see families returning. Hopefully soon NGOs will recognise the community growing, and help get the city get back on its feet

Peshmerga base in the south of Sinjar


PKK soldiers play volleyball in an abandoned school that is now being used as a training base


A PKK soldier returns home from a long shift manning a checkpoint on the outskirts of town


Guns propped against a wall in a Yazidi female protection unit base at the foot of Mount Sinjar

 
Families in Sinjar
Many families have started packing up their few belongings, and leaving the refugee camps to return home – if their home is still standing. The Basi family, recently back in Sinjar, outside the house they were building before they fled. They hope to have it finished before the summer

 
Kassim Alias and his family at their home in Sinjar. Kassim tried to get a boat from Turkey to Greece, but it sunk, so he and his family came home

Nory Bahro with her son at their home in Sinjar

Sardo Hassan was one of the first men to return to Sinjar – he was given a gun by friends to protect his family

The Khally family unload trucks full of possessions into their home in Burok, in the east of Sinjar. Burok was under the control of Isis until the Kurdish forces liberated the area in November

We can never say it is 100% safe, it is Iraq after all! But it is good to be home. We spent months living all 17 of us in a tent
Khally family member

Layla Khider and her daughter at home Sinjar. She, her husband and their four children escaped the advancing Islamic State, taking refuge in the mountains nearby. One of their daughters died from dehydration. Layla and her husband decided to move back to Sinjar to be closer to home. They are expecting a child

Signs of life
Life is returning to the city. The first Arabic school in the city of Sinjar reopened on the 7 February, and already has 350 students. The headteacher came from a university job in Sulaimaniya to run the school

The people need me here, and I want to do all I can to help the children. I am worried about what I can do on my own, at the moment I have 350 students, but by the end of the month there will be close to 500. It is a lot of work for one man!
Shahab Hamad, headteacher

A barber shop in the centre of Sinjar


Jamil Kamal sits behind the counter of his photo print studio in Sinjar. He came back to the area to reopen his business two months ago


A group of boys who have just returned to their village, walking through the empty streets to see what has changed


Two men catching up on the streets of Sinjar


Residents of Burok burn the plastic off copper wire to sell in a nearby market

This photostory is about reverse migration – people going home rather than coming our way. It is also about the less affluent people caught up in the migration crisis, who can’t afford to leave, and those have to be brave in the face of a war that still rages on mere miles from where they are trying to give their children a normal life
Gus Palmer, photographer