Rudaw portal has highest number of visits in Iraq

ERBIL, Kurdistan Region - According to recent data published by Google Analytics, a service which tracks website traffic, Rudaw digital portal is number one in Kurdistan and Iraq in terms of visitors.

SimilarWeb, an information technology company which uses Google Analytics data, is the most reliable center of data and information about websites. It found that Rudaw is the most visited digital portal with an average of 16 million visits across Iraq over the past six months.

"Being on the top was expected from Rudaw and does not need any data to prove it, everybody knows Rudaw is number one in terms of visitors, quality and content and we have no close competitors," said Hemin Lihony, head of the Rudaw Network's  Digital Portal.

Lihony added that Rudaw emerged to make innovations in electronic media in Kurdistan and Iraq and now it is on the top.

"This is achieved from the tiredness of the portal and Rudaw's news gathering staff who have restlessly been working," to develop the website.

Lihony vowed that in the coming months the Rudaw portal will be subjectively renewed "because the future is only for digital media."

"Rudaw is thanking its visitors for their trust they have put in it and their dependence on it as their first source for news," he added.

He explained that all sections on Rudaw portal are largely reliant on by the world media, especially Rudaw English.

"Since the fight against the Islamic State began, Rudaw English has become a consistent source of information about Kurdistan for the world media," he said.

According to Google Analytics Kurdish media have taken the 2nd and 3rd places as well, including Xendan and nrttv before various Arabic websites.





Rudaw Media Network publishes news in Kurdish, English, Arabic and Turkish on the Middle East region as a whole and Kurdistan in particular.

Each language on the site also has its smartphone and iPad application with half a million subscribers in total.

In regards to social media, Lihony added that Rudaw intends to work more on Twitter which is widely used by important people across the world and often in Kurdistan.

On social media Rudaw Arabic is the most active news page across Iraq and among the Kurdish webpages. Xendan is number one. But on Twitter Rudaw is the most active page.

Rudaw has 10 pages on Facebook including Rudaw English, Rudaw Sorani, Rudaw Arabic, Rudaw Kurmanci, Rudaw Turkish, Rudaw Health, Rudaw Sport, Your Rudaw, Rudaw Arts,  and Rudaw Generation. 